Swiss Speaking Points for the Ministerial Dialogue on Long-Term Climate Finance
Recognizing the goal has yet to be fulfilled, what were the key areas of progress, challenges and
lessons learned, in particular in the areas of adaptation and concessional finance? How can the goal
be best delivered at the latest in 2023 despite the current challenges?
•
•

•

•

•

The just presented figures show well that we have made great progress since 2010, when
the goal was set in all three dimensions of the goal, but we have not yet reached it.
Switzerland assessed its fair share of the USD 100bn goal based on the capacity to pay
and the polluter-pays principle to be 450-600 Mio USD per year from public and mobilized
private sources. Switzerland has achieved its fair share since 2018. In 2020 our public and
mobilized private climate finance amounted to 702 Million USD, which was a significant
overachievement. Overall the Swiss climate finance was increased by 82% since 2013.
We recognize that the USD 100bn goal is a collective goal and we encourage all developed
countries to do more, in particular those that have not yet lived up to their fair share with
respect to their emissions and capacity to pay.
We also need to recognize the importance of enabling environments in contributing and
recipient countries. Ambitious climate mitigation and adaptation policies, clear political
priorities and the right investment framework conditions are key to facilitate the
provision and mobilization of public and private finance for climate action.
For our parliament it is key to see what happens with the money we provide and mobilize for
climate action in developing countries. They want to see results and the assurance that the
funds are well invested. We need to get better in measuring impacts and results and stop
talking just about the quantum and also talk about the results achieved on the ground.

What specific action can be taken to enhance and simplify access to climate finance from
concessional sources and international investment flows?
• Switzerland strongly supports the simplification and harmonization of access
procedures, in particular in multilateral funds, while ensuring the compliance with social
and environmental safeguards. It is very difficult for us to understand why the various
institutions providing and mobilizing finance, in particular the multilateral ones, have so
different access requirements.
• We all are represented in the boards of these various institutions. Why couldn’t we
come together and instruct the funds to harmonize their access requirements to the
extent possible?
• Balance sheets of MDBs can still be better leveraged, while maintaining their AAA rating. The
G20 capital adequacy framework (CAF) review contains useful recommendations in this
regard. This would free a lot of additional capital, and a large part of that would go to climate.
• We must particularly seek ways to ease access for averting, minimizing and addressing Loss
and Damage. Prearranged ex-ante finance, such as insurance schemes, is one of the
approaches to ensure resources are provided expeditiously when climate-related disasters
strike. For that purpose, Switzerland for instance supports the African Risk Capacity or the
World Bank’s Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance (DRFI) Program.
• The IMF’s Resilience and Sustainability Trust (RST) is a promising tool to help vulnerable
countries to build resilience and sustainable development through investments in climate.
• Access requirements for bilateral climate finance can also be further reviewed with a
view to make them as lean and efficient as possible.
• There is a limit to speed. While we must do away with unnecessary requirements,
climate finance must be founded on a solid arrangement of mutual accountability
between providers and recipients. This means that requirements, such as clear results
orientation and reporting, solid environmental and social risk management, the involvement of
pertinent stakeholders including vulnerable groups, conflict sensitivity and of course financial
accountability are important and must be carefully considered throughout the project
management cycle.

How can transparency in the delivery of the goal be further enhanced? What steps should be taken
taken to improve the transparency of information on climate finance provided, mobilized and received
to build a common understanding?
• We already have a good transparency architecture in place with a number of
instruments, namely the Enhanced Transparency Framework, the ex-ante climate finance
submissions pursuant to Art. 9.5 and the helpful aggregate reports prepared by the SCF.
These provide both backward and forward looking information. Instead of mandating
new reporting, we should all harness these existing channels, making best use of them.
• We see a significant data gap on measuring the impact and effectiveness of climate
finance flows. We have to get better at measuring the impact of the flows on the ground and
also focus on the results achieved and not just the finance provided and mobilized.
• The key findings of the SCF reports show clearly that we need more granular and activity
level data. The modalities, procedures and guidelines of the Enhanced Transparency
Framework provide for clear guidance on this and we hope that the data coverage and
granularity of data will improve once the first Biennial Transparency Reports have been
submitted.
• In particular, the MDBs can still do more to provide more granularity of their climate finance
provision, so that the information can be fully captured avoiding double counting, e.g. in the
context of the Biennial Assessment of Climate Finance Flows.
• Accountability and transparency are key and we must all do our utmost in this regard.
Collecting and aggregating data also comes with costs for all stakeholders involved. The data
we collect has thus to be as granular and disaggregated as needed to ensure
transparency and enable learning, while avoiding unnecessary reporting burden.
• While we see the benefits of a common agreed definition on climate finance and
common accounting methodologies, but the Paris Agreement anchored the bottom-up
approach on definitions, methodologies and approaches.
• The SCF report on climate finance definitions indicates that there are many definitions in
use for various different use cases and it will be impossible to create one detailed
definition capturing them all.
• Let me give you an example: while Switzerland is of the strong opinion that investments in
fossil fuels, even if related to efficiency gains, can and should not be considered as climate
finance because of the high emissions and the severe lock-in effects associated with it. But
we’ve heard very strong voices from other Parties in the past that improving the efficiency of
their fossil fuel energy plants is an important mitigation measure for them in the context of their
NDC. While we note the views of these Parties we could never agree to count investments
e.g. in a more efficient coal power plant as climate finance in a common agreed definition.
What lessons from the delivery of the goal can be derived and considered in the context of the
deliberations on the NCQG?
• The most important lesson is that given the finances needed to honor the goals of the
Paris agreement, the USD 100 BN goal is too narrow in terms of sources and
contributors. We need “all hands on deck”.
• We have to create an incentive for the alignment of all financial flows for low-emission and
climate resilient development pathways and we have to ensure a strengthened, more
dynamic and broadened contributor donor base, considering the capacity-to-pay and the
polluter-pays principle of all potential contributors.
• The mobilization of private climate finance has proven to be very challenging. We will have
to create incentives for enhanced private climate finance mobilization through the new goal.
This includes better framework conditions for climate action, for instance through phasing out
fossil fuel subsidies.
• The geographic distribution is a challenge. The latest data shows that very few middle
income economies receive by far the largest share of climate finance. The most vulnerable
countries and communities, in particular LDCs, SIDS, receive much less finance. This is
partially also related to the access challenges raised in particular by LDCs and SIDS. We will

•

•

have to ensure that our support reaches the most vulnerable countries and communities
and set the new goal in a manner, which facilitates this.
Demand-drivenness is a key success factor and indispensable to ensure country
ownership. This means that we must not over-engineer the new goal from the top. Too many
quantitative and / or qualitative elements will limit the country-drivenness significantly and
create a challenge for implementation.
Quantity matters of course but even more important are results. We must make a better
effort in the NCQG to show, on an aggregated level, what the impact of our investments
are in terms of climate mitigation and adaptation.

